Mobility as a Service (MaaS) Applications: a
reference security architecture
Valentina Casola
Department of Electrical Engineering
and Information Technologies
University of Naples Federico II
Naples, Italy
casolav@unina.it
Daniele Iorio
Department of Electrical Engineering
and Information Technologies
University of Naples Federico II
Naples, Italy
daniele.iorio2@unina.it
Abstract—In the modern era of transportation in urban envi-
ronment, optimization of traffic is crucial. In the context of Smart
Cities, Mobility as a Service (MaaS) is a revolutionary paradigm
that offers integrated solutions to enhance urban mobility. The
general goal is to develop a single digital hub that allows users
to plan, book, and pay for their journeys, as well as gather
data about public transport, their occupation, traffic, and other
alternative modes of transportation (like e-mobility solutions, car
sharing, bike sharing, etc.). In this context, security and privacy
of data and infrastructures, are still open issues that may limit
full adoption of these applications. In this paper, we propose a
reference architecture to improve security in MaaS platforms. We
present the initial design process to understand the requirements
needed to cover all the characteristics of a MaaS system that
defines a reference architecture; later, security analysis will be
performed with a risk-based and threats-based approach. Finally,
as a Proof of Concept, we will present an implementation of a case
study to validate the security of the proposed solution suitable
for a secure distributed MaaS application.
Index Terms—Mobility as a Service, MaaS, Smart Mobility,
Smart Cities, Intelligent Public Transportation System, Reference
security architecture
I. INTRODUCTION
A Smart City (SC) is defined as “an urban area that uses
technology and data-driven solutions to improve the quality
of life for its residents, enhance operational efficiency, and
address various challenges such as traffic congestion, waste
management, energy consumption, and public services. It in-
volves integrating information and communication technology
(ICT) infrastructure to enable better communication between
city systems and residents, resulting in increased sustainability,
innovation, and overall well-being”1. It introduces the concept
IoV (Internet of Vehicles) [1] intended as a network that
links pedestrians, cars, and parts of urban infrastructure using
several sensors, software, built-in hardware, and types of
connection to enable reliable and continuous communication.
As a part of a Smart City, IoV strives to make transportation
more autonomous, safe, fast, and efficient. V2V (Vehicle-to-
Vehicle) communication describes the inter-vehicle interaction
[4]; similarly, V2X (Vehicle-to-Environment) draws the link
between the vehicle and the rest of the infrastructure based
1https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/smart-city
on the DSRC (Dedicated Short-Range Communications) tech-
nology allowing direct wireless exchange [14]. Everything
is supported by Mobile Area Network (MAN), Wide Area
Network (WAN) 5G technologies, GPS satellites, etc. as
illustrated in Wu et al. [18].
One of the pillars of Smart Cities is a system referred
to as IPTS – Intelligent Public Transportation System [17].
Available IPTS are often closed, technology driven, and there’s
lack of best-practice and guidelines for their development.
The scientific and industrial community is cooperating to
build a domain specific architecture as generic as possible to
be able to connect heterogeneous services, collect, store and
analyse all the (near-)real-time information gathered from the
environment and allow easy service extension. The target is
to reduce traffic jams and CO2 emissions, and build a system
that is integrated, federated and user-friendly, making cities
more eco-friendly, liveable, and efficient.
The main obstacle to the development of a network of
multiple smart cities is the presence of hamlets populated
by a few people, in which public transportation is generally
absent. These small areas are often rural and have narrow
streets, hence conventional private means of transport are
preferred [3]. Currently, there are lots of projects founded by
the European Union carrying out experiments in different cities
to gather useful information about the environment to deploy
a functional federated system.
In the MaaS context, the term Reference Architecture is
used to describe a blueprint and a starting point for the system
architecture description. Crucial features are: i) cooperation
between different types of MaaS, ii) modularity and flexibility
in the composition of the system, and iii) adaptation to new
law regulations and initiatives. However, in the literature there
is still a lack of guidelines for users and architecture definition
and of standards for data formatting, storing, manipulation, and
sharing.
Starting from these considerations, the goal of this work
is to analyse the state-of-the-art of MaaS, to identify the
main users and requirements of such application, choose
the most suitable reference architecture (general enough to
cope with the needs), and then perform a security and risk
analysis to identify possible threats and related risks resulting
2025 9th International Conference on Models and Technologies for Intelligent Transportation Systems (MT-ITS) | 979-8-3315-8063-6/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/MT-ITS68460.2025.11223551
Authorized licensed use limited to: IMT - Alti Studi Lucca. Downloaded on August 29,2026 at 12:29:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
in designing a secure reference architecture. The outcome will
be a prototype proposal of a security layer, showing a possible
security and privacy enhancement.
The structure of the paper is the following: in Section II, we
present some related work to identify from the state of the art
the requirements for the design of a reference architecture.
In Section III, after the architecture definition, we present
a detailed security analysis, from threat modelling to risk
analysis, while, in Section IV, we present the security design
of the architecture with identification of Security Controls.
In Section V a case study is presented and evaluated to
demonstrate the security of the provided solution and finally,
in Section VI, some conclusions and future work is drawn.
II. RELATED WORK AND SECURITY REQUIREMENTS
ELICITATION
At European level, the MaaS4EU project (2017-2020) [9]
featured different partners across Europe with three pilot
projects in Budapest, Greater Manchester, and Luxembourg
outlining the basis of the development and integration of
such technologies across the Continent. In Italy, there are
three different ongoing projects: i) MaaS4Italy (2023-2026)2
(financed by European Union in the context of the PNRR
-Piano Nazionale di Ripresa e Resilienza- and Italia Dig-
itale 2026 projects) aims at experiment MaaS environment
in selected cities, build an open platform for mobility data
collection and sharing, and enhance public transportation,
ii) MOST – Sustainable Mobility National Research Centre3
aims at enhancing sustainable mobility, iii) Borgo 4.0 project4
aims at providing a secure integrated platform for sustainable
management of infrastructure and optimization of traffic. This
last project is currently developed in Lioni (near Avellino in
Campania) where lots of renovation interventions have been
made to introduce sensors, cameras, smart cross walks, and
urban testing circuit (aiming the introduction of autonomous
driving vehicles) making it the first research facility for experi-
mentation in Italy. All these projects focused on functional and
architectural aspects of MaaS platforms, few of them addresses
the security problems that arise in data communication and
elaboration including related privacy issues.
In this section, we will describe the process that led to the
definition of 32 high level requirements that are useful to drive
the decision about the architecture to use. The analysis will en-
counter functional and non-functional requirements to describe
respectively system interaction with the environment and its
measurable properties, security, and privacy requirements to
allow system and data protection.
A. Security requirements
The requirement analysis starts from the definition of per-
spectives, service types, and stakeholders interested in the
system. As indicated in the context of the ReiseNavet5 project
2https://innovazione.gov.it/progetti/mobility-as-a-service-for-italy/
3https://www.centronazionalemost.it/eg/
4https://www.borgo40.eu/en/
5https://reisenavet.no/
that produced the SINTEF report [16], there are 4 main
perspectives to be considered to improve sustainable mobility,
find a valuable business model, define stakeholders, and build
a platform capable of data management. In this context,
European projects like Mobility Data Space6 and Gaia-X7 [2]
are crucial to provide a secure and transparent communication
channel for data sharing in compliance with GDPR (General
Data Protection Regulation).
Furthermore, different service types considered are related
to the crucial concepts of flexibility and interoperability, since
different providers can issue the system, they can rely on third
party services, and federate the system facilitating roaming.
In the MaaS ecosystem there is no standard definition of
involved actors names yet, but in the cited report there is an
indication of a set of generic roles that represent stakeholder
archetypes with non-overlapping responsibilities with some
connected to the ISO Technical Report 7878. Finally, 18 actors
are defined, divided into primary, secondary, and tertiary.
After collecting and merging the results of this analysis, it is
possible to define the final list of requirements. From SINTEF
work, 13 functional and non-functional requirements emerge,
8 more have been defined in Di Martino et al. [17] while in
Callegati et al. [5] there is no explicit requirement definition,
but there are interesting inputs about federation, interaction,
modularity, and data storage, sharing, and analysis. To define
security and privacy requirements, form Callegati et al. [6]
emerge principles of data and service protection (since the
system is built using a microservice architecture), while Cottril
et al. [10], MaaS4EU [9], and Gaia-X [2] works have been
used to investigate privacy concerns and Data Sovereignty
Constraints. Furthermore, Casola et al. [12] introduces threat-
driven approach to perform a security analysis on a MaaS
architecture while [11] explores privacy and security issues.
Table I summarizes the results of the research and the
subsequent harmonization process to avoid overlapping, giving
an ID, a formal description and a letter to define if it is
functional (F), non-functional (NF), security (S), or privacy
(P) related.
B. Reference architectures, state of the art
Currently, available architectures are not general enough
to be used in the MaaS environment because of the strong
connection to the IoT environment pervading Smart Cities.
Starting from the previous requirement analysis, a comparison
process is needed to define benefits and limitations, leading to
the choice of which of the available architectures can be the
blueprint.
Traditional IoT systems architectures were first assessed
for their similitude to MaaS architectures, but they are not
suitable for MaaS purposes since they do not provide explicit
support for the key concept of IPTS. Furthermore, sensors
are built by different vendors, thus have distinctive data
format, are mobile, and produce a massive amount of data
6https://mobility-dataspace.eu/
7https://gaia-x.eu/
Authorized licensed use limited to: IMT - Alti Studi Lucca. Downloaded on August 29,2026 at 12:29:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
TABLE I: Final requirement list
Code Formal description Classification
MR001 The system shall acquire information from multiple
and heterogeneous spatio-temporal data sources. F
MR002 The system shall connect to multiple third-party data
sources of interest. F
MR003 The system shall have internal storage and management
capabilities for massive spatio-temporal data. NF
MR004 The system shall support multiple data processing paradigms,
both in batch and stream. F
MR005
The system shall have loose coupling of internal components,
to enable future addition and/or
replacement of components/services.
NF
MR006
The system shall provide interoperability with external
services/applications, by means of standard
communication protocols.
NF
MR007 The system shall introduce scalability, with respect to the
number of active IoT/IoV devices. NF
MR008 The system shall exploit edge computing resources. NF
MR009 The system shall publish standardized data via NAPs made
available through European mobility data spaces. F
MR010 The system shall provide generic support for
the establishment of MaaS. NF
MR011 The system shall follow common principles for fair
collaboration and privacy protection. NF
MR012 The system shall integrate standardized services providing
information on their use. NF
MR013 The system shall publish standardized data on all
transport services. NF
MR014
The system shall provide complete travel planning services
with all types of transport services as generic booking and
standardized payment services.
NF
MR015
The system shall be able to verify a process in terms of actors
(or services) involved, their actions and their relationship
with one another.
S
MR016 The system shall be able to hold its actor (or service)
accountable for its actions in a process. S
MR017
The system shall have the ability to maintain information
for an extended period of time.
This is essential for applications run in an enterprise system.
S
MR018
The system shall allow users to customize it by
setting metadata such as time, events of recording,
and the granularity of provenance.
S
MR019 The system shall have a rating scheme in place as a possible
implementation for trustworthiness evaluation mechanisms. S
MR020
The system shall possess service trustworthiness in
order to mitigate against opportunities for a malicious insider
to succeed in registering a rogue service.
S
MR021 The system shall provide input sanitization to protect
applications from most of the malicious invocations. S
MR022 The system shall incorporate the Privacy by Design principles. P
MR023 The system shall determine ways to minimize collection of
data where possible. P
MR024 The system shall appoint a Data Protection Officer. P
MR025
The system shall be structured to incorporate the concept
of Demilitarized Zone
isolating the rest of the system.
S
MR026 The system shall utilize only secured protocols and
ports in communication in order to ensure security of data. S
MR027
The system shall ensure that all users become aware of the
terms and conditions of the privacy policy giving
control over the information.
P
MR028
The system shall provide the capability to the users to opt
out from using the application or withdraw any permission
that may have been granted through the app.
P
MR029 The system shall ensure that customers’ payment related
info is not saved together with info related to the MaaS. P
MR030 The system shall ensure strong password policies and procedures
and exploit multi-factor authentication in password reset situations. S
MR031
The system shall use suitable anonymization techniques in
order to ensure personal data is differentiated from
the data subject and avoid the risk of re-identification.
P
MR032 The system shall provide a logging mechanism for
accountability and auditing purposes. S
to be managed. Generally, these systems rely on three-to-
five generic layers top-down architecture including perception,
network, application, service, and business [13].
The SMAll (Smart Mobility for All) system presented by
the University of Bologna [5] addresses the issue of Multi-
modal travelling. In the beginning, it introduces the definition
of the MaaS Stack composed of three tiers in turn composed of
four macro-layers built on top of each other. The application
is microservice oriented and introduces crucial concepts of
dynamic and static federation respectively, allowing service
Fig. 1: IPTS architecture
trading and agreement definition on secure and reliable inter-
communication technologies between services.
An interesting IPTS system is presented as a collaboration
between Hitachi Rail and University Federico II of Naples
[17]. The approach used is divided in steps. First thing
first, the operating environment is defined, introducing core
components: i) Data Producers (under direct control of IPTS)
i.e., collections of sensors IoT and IoV able to collect data
from the environment and provide them to the system, ii) Third
Party Data/Service Providers i.e., platform that lies outside
the architecture boundary with which the IPTS interacts to
gather environment information (GAIA-X European Cloud,
Mobility Data Spaces, National Access Points - NAPs), iii)
Back End i.e., the execution platform (local server farm or
Cloud infrastructure) on which the core part of the IPTS is
intended to be executed, iv) End Points i.e., collection of
different users, decision makers, third-party software solutions,
and IoT systems. Afterwards, the architecture is detailed with
the description of the subsystems shown in Fig. 1.
Since this architecture is data-oriented allowing interaction
of multiple data sources, modular thanks to the operating
environment, and already publicly deployed and operated by
Hitachi Rail itself, it is the most suitable architecture to
start with our analysis. From now on, the focus will be on
improving its security, implementing the Security Subsystem
as a security layer between the system API and the endpoints.
III. SECURITY ANALYSIS
Main security goals of this proposal are Confidentiality,
Integrity, and Availability (CIA) and privacy protection of data
and assets involved in the architecture. They can be addressed
using different available and well known technologies and
techniques.
Authorized licensed use limited to: IMT - Alti Studi Lucca. Downloaded on August 29,2026 at 12:29:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
By choosing the reference architecture, and following
the Secure Software Development Lifecycle (SSDL), we can
clearly identify the critical assets and communication employ-
ing Microsoft Threat Modelling Tool8 to provide a model
of the system and identify relevant threats according to the
STRIDE approach. The resulting security hazards are then
evaluated with a Risk Analysis approach, aimed at computing
the risk as Likelihood ∗ Impact sticking to OWASP Risk Rat-
ing Methodology9. Likelihood is intended as a rough measure
of how likely the vulnerability is to be uncovered and exploited
by an attacker, while Impact is the evaluation of the effect of
a successful attack on the system (business, reputation, etc.).
The value can be computed employing tools like OWASP Risk
Rating Calculator10.
Starting from the layout presented in Fig. 1, the system
analysis consists in creating a first model of the MaaS ar-
chitecture without any security layer, evaluating it to identify
security controls to enforce. It will later be compared with a
second model that will include all the identified controls, to
demonstrate the overall enhancement due to the introduction
of proper countermeasures.
Threat family name Stride category Identified threat
number
Source & Destination
Spoofing S 21
Authenticated Dataflow
Compromised T 28
Collision Attack &
Replay Attack T 15
SQL Injection T 8
Potential Data Repudiation R 38
Weak Authentication
Scheme & Access Control, I 11
Weak Credential Storage I 20
Denial of Service &
Potential Process Crash D 87
Elevation Using
Remote Code Execution E 25
Elevation Using
impersonation E 59
TABLE II: Identified threat families
The first analysis highlights a total of 312 threats distributed,
for simplicity’s sake, in the ten different families (Tab. II). Of
all of them, 53 are already mitigated (due to the technologies
used to implement the subsystems) and 126 are not applicable.
Thereafter, the risk computation is carried out, showing an
overall medium-high risk level.
IV. SECURITY DESIGN OF A MAAS ARCHITECTURE
Given the static analysis provided, it is crucial to identify
security controls that must be implemented to reach the
desired security level following the NIST Control Framework
[15]. This mapping process is carried out by assigning risk
to each subfamily performing a Per-Asset Security Controls
8https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/security/develop/
threat-modeling-tool
9https://owasp.org/www-community/OWASP Risk Rating Methodology
10https://owasp-risk-rating.com/
Identification; whereupon the Per-System Security Controls
Identification is performed by evaluating the need for addi-
tional security controls at each asset of the system due to the
relationships existing among its components [7], [8].
A. Security control identification
To design the security controls needed to mitigate the
emerged threats, we referred to the NIST 800-53 security
baseline rev. 511 of which 20 control families, the following
5 are relevant for this proposal and accordingly detailed:
Access Control (AC) (handles access to the system and
its information), Audit and Accountability (AU) (handles
the collection and analysis of information related to system
activity), Identification and Authentication (IA) (handles
identification and authentication of users and devices connect-
ing to the system), System and Communications Protection
(SC) (handles network protection including cryptography to
protect transmitted information), and System and Information
Integrity (SI) (handles integrity protection of the system
and of the information avoiding unauthorized manipulation
and mitigating malware threats). Each family provides many
controls, of these, only a subset is applicable. Table III shows
a summary of the applicable controls for each family with the
required implementation level and related responsibilities.
Family ID Applicable
controls
Required
level Responsibilities
AC 10/25 High
Account management
Access Enforcement
Separation of Duties
AU 12/16 Mid/High
Event Logging
Report and Alert Generation
Non-repudiation
IA 6/12 High User identification
Authentication Feedback
SC 17/51 High
Separation of System User
functionalities
DoS, Boundary, and
Cryptographic protection
SI 9/23 Mid/High
Malicious Code and
Spam protection
System Monitoring
Error Handling
Memory Protection
TABLE III: Applicable control families
Given the previous static analysis, it is important to notice
that each control must be enforced at a medium/high level.
Once applicable NIST controls have been identified, we traced
them with the corresponding asset and the 10 cited threat
families to define proper configuration.
V. CASE STUDY AND EVALUATION
In this section, we present a case study on the secure
layer and its effectiveness, providing results of a new security
analysis.
11https://csrc.nist.gov/pubs/sp/800/53/b/upd1/final
Authorized licensed use limited to: IMT - Alti Studi Lucca. Downloaded on August 29,2026 at 12:29:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Fig. 2: MaaS4You secure architecture
A. Prototype description
Since the focus is to match the security and privacy re-
quirements previously identified, Fig. 2 highlights in red the
components that are set up by the prototype: “Map navigation”
and “Cost computation” are mock-ups for services offered by
”Service subsystem” while “App/Website” is the endpoint with
which users interface in the system.
The prototype, called “MaaS4You”, is developed as a Client-
Server using the Model View Controller (MVC) approach
to build the architecture and Data Transfer Object (DTO)
to allow data sharing between entities. The JAVA language
has been used in the context of the Spring Boot framework,
allowing mapping between wrappers and implemented classes
granting secure extraction of data. Finally, to build the web
pages, Thymeleaf template is used granting wide compatibility
(refer to the MaaS4You GitHub repository12 for further
details).
There are two different types of actors: i) User that, after
authentication, manages the lifecycle of a trip, and visualize
the list of all his reservations, and ii) Administrator that can
perform the same actions, but can also list all the planned
journeys in the system. The cost of the trip will automatically
be computed based on the chosen mean of transport.
To comply with the control-threat trace outlined in Sec-
tion IV-A, we decided to use the following technologies
to implement the Security Layer: i) Keycloak13 for Identity
and Access Management (IAM), ii) HashiCorp Vault14 for
identity-based secret and encryption management, iii) Ng-
inX15 in combination with OpenSSL16 for adoption of proxy
and secure communications over the network, iv) Docker17
12https://github.com/IorioD/Maas4You
13https://www.keycloak.org/
14https://www.hashicorp.com/en/products/vault
15https://nginx.org/en/
16https://www.openssl.org/
17https://www.docker.com/
Fig. 3: Modified secure system model
for system containerization. Furthermore, Content Security
Policies (CSPs)18 are used to mitigate Cross-Site Scripting
(XSS), OWASP Enterprise Security API (ESAPI)19 are used
to perform input sanitization, an internal logging mechanism is
implemented via Apache Commons Logging library. Finally,
a token-based mechanism is used to verify the source of a
web page defining cross-site or same-site domain attribute to
mitigate Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF).
B. Security evaluation
To carry out the second security analysis, we provide a new
model, of which Fig. 3 shows the security subsystem.
The results highlight a total of 369 treats, of which 106 are
already mitigated and 153 are not applicable. Comparing this
numbers with the previous ones, we observe that total number
of threats is apparently higher since the attack surface is wider
due to the introduction of more assets, but the remaining ones
are mitigated using the proposed security mechanisms.
To conclude the analysis, we report the list of implemented
requirements describing the corresponding coverage level:
1) MR014: partially covered with trip planning and cost
computation.
2) MR015: fully covered with the use of Keycloak IAM.
3) MR016: fully covered with the internal logging mecha-
nism.
4) MR018: partially covered with the user personal profile
page.
5) MR021: fully covered using the OWASP ESAPI.
6) MR022: partially covered using Spring Boot framework
mechanism to extract hashed data.
7) MR026: fully covered using NginX combined with
OpenSSL certificates and Dockerization.
18https://owasp.org/www-community/controls/Content Security Policy
19https://owasp.org/www-project-enterprise-security-api/
Authorized licensed use limited to: IMT - Alti Studi Lucca. Downloaded on August 29,2026 at 12:29:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
8) MR027: fully covered by the displaying of a “terms and
condition” page right after the login.
9) MR028: fully covered by the display of a “terms and
condition” page with the opt-in/out selection.
10) MR030: fully covered with Keycloak granting password
policies definition, brute force attack protection, and
2FA.
11) MR032: fully covered with the implementation of the
internal logging mechanism, tracing actions performed
in the system.
Since the prototype is installed on a local machine, it im-
plements 7/11 security requirements, 3/7 privacy requirements,
and 1 Non-functional for a total of 11/32.
Further investigations show that the proposed security layer
implements 90% of AC, 42% of AU, 83% of IA, 88% of
SC, and 44% of SI controls identified in Tab. III. Moreover,
the overall system risk level is lowered from medium/high
to medium/low with significant improvements emerging in
mitigation of Weak Access Control and Denial of Service since
related risk value decrease from high to low.
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
The MaaS concept represents a huge change in the way
cities and mobility solutions are intended: integrated, efficient,
and sustainable transport solutions are the intended objective.
This work shows the steps that form a state-of-the-art anal-
ysis allow the definition of 32 requirements used to identify
the main need of a possible reference architecture. From
the related works, different architectural solutions have been
identified from which emerge crucial themes like modularity,
scalability, along with interface and data standardization to
build a robust and integrated system. Ultimately, based on the
outcomes of the security analysis, a potential implementation
of a security layer emerges employable on different systems
with appropriate customization; it provides a medium/high
level of security for the identified threats.
The presented results have been submitted to Hitachi se-
curity experts, showing that the provided risk-based security
analysis will be taken in consideration for further improve-
ment. Furthermore, it proposes security controls extensions
and possible integration with new technologies to deploy
additional security and privacy aspects. The integration pro-
cess will be possible only after proper implementation and
configuration with their existing architecture.